Brevlada

Requires Rust 1.92 or newer, GTK 4.12 or newer, libadwaita 1.4 or newer,
WebKitGTK 6.0, OpenSSL, pkg-config, glib-compile-resources, and xdg-open
(xdg-utils) for opening links in the desktop's default browser.

Fedora development packages:
  gtk4-devel libadwaita-devel webkitgtk6.0-devel openssl-devel gcc

Build: cargo build
Run: cargo run
Format: cargo fmt
Verify: cargo test && cargo fmt --check && cargo clippy --all-targets -- -D warnings

GNOME Online Accounts must have a mail account configured. Configure accounts through the GNOME Settings Online Accounts panel.

The SQLite cache remains at $XDG_DATA_HOME/brevlada/emails.db, defaulting to
~/.local/share/brevlada/emails.db. Existing Python cache tables are imported
once into Rust tables and retained. New cache records use account, folder,
and UID together; UIDVALIDITY changes invalidate the affected folder cache.

Interactive folder/message loads and background caching run on separate workers.
Background caching starts for all accounts at launch and checks again every five
minutes. Four background workers allow up to two active requests per account.
Background sync uses the persisted folder list in rust_sync_settings for each
account. Existing and new accounts default to INBOX only. Other cached folders
are retained and remain available for interactive browsing. Additional selected
folders use the same scheduler. Inboxes across all accounts take priority over
caching other folders. Within each tier, message lists come first, followed by
recent messages for previews, older
headers, and remaining bodies. Other folders' headers and bodies wait until all
queued and running inbox work finishes. Folder discovery and message-count checks
can use spare capacity meanwhile. After inboxes, expanded accounts' folders
precede other folders. Expansion changes reprioritize queued work.
Trash/Junk special-use folders and common Trash/Spam names are excluded.

The sync header shows completed/total accounts, folders, and message-cache entries
across all accounts, hiding totals until discovery is complete. A message present
in multiple folders is cached and counted separately in each folder. The last-sync
timestamp is saved at the start of a new sync and restored on startup; "Last synced"
uses that start time, including when a sync was interrupted.

Headers and bodies are saved incrementally in SQLite WAL transactions. Switching
views does not cancel background caching; shutdown interrupts network requests,
and restart resumes missing work from the cache. Completed bodies are not fetched
again. Large folders use bounded batches; the UI shows the latest 50 messages.
Preview fetches also cache the full text/HTML body without marking mail read.
Opening a message marks it read. Attachments are listed by name, not cached as files.

Sender avatars are resolved once per address and cached in rust_avatars, with
"this sender has no avatar" cached too so misses are not retried on every launch.
Sources are tried in order: a connected Google account's own photo from its
OpenID profile; Gravatar; then the sender domain's icon from Google's favicon
service. Contact photos are also requested from the Google People API, which
Online Accounts' OAuth client is not authorized for, so the first refusal
disables contact lookups for that account for the session.

Domain icons are skipped for addresses at public mailbox providers, listed in
sender_domains.rs, so correspondents do not all wear their provider's logo. The
match is on the address's own host only, so a provider's own sending sub-domain
still gets its brand icon. The same file maps bulk-mail domains to the brand
they send for, because the icon service only knows the brand's main domain.
Google resolves registrable domains, so a sub-domain falls back to its parent.
Icons smaller than requested are the placeholder globe and are rejected.

Brand icons come from whichever of two icon services holds the sharper one;
neither wins consistently. An icon is scored by the detail it actually has
rather than the size it claims: asked for a large icon, a service enlarges a
small favicon by repeating pixels, and dividing out the resulting block size
recovers the real resolution. A service that answers an unknown domain with a
generated grey letter tile is rejected outright, since it would otherwise
outrank a real but smaller icon. Domains whose best icon is still too coarse
fall through to initials, which look better than a handful of enlarged pixels. Each icon is laid on an opaque plate of its own size
before being cached, so a logo with a transparent background does not show the
window behind it. Nothing is held back at the edges: a margin reads as a ring
around the logo and makes a full-bleed square icon fight the round avatar, which
crops to a circle anyway. The plate takes its colour from the ring where
the circular crop falls. A logo that is one solid shape there lends the plate
its own colour, so the shape's antialiased rim blends in instead of leaving a
pale bezel around the avatar. Where the crop runs through several colours, as it
does across the quadrants of the Windows logo, no colour matches and white is
used, since picking one would flood the logo's transparent gaps with it. A logo
whose rim is mostly empty carries its own padding and also sits on white.

The plate is the icon's own size unless the circular crop would cut the logo.
How far the icon's marks reach from its centre decides that: a round logo, or
one whose edges match the plate, reaches no further than half the plate and is
left edge to edge, while a square logo such as the Windows flag carries itself
into the corners and the plate grows to fit them with 15% extra room so they sit clear of the rim. Measuring the
reach separates the two exactly, instead of guessing from the icon's shape, and
keeps the ring to the icons that need it.
Avatars are resampled to twice the size they are drawn at before reaching the
widget, because handing GTK a much larger image makes it minify in one step at
draw time and the logo turns to mush. Senders with nothing anywhere keep the
initials drawn by AdwAvatar. Changing a source or the plating clears the whole
avatar cache once, via the avatar_sources key in rust_metadata.

Contact photos are not fetched. Online Accounts' Google credential cannot reach
the People API at all, which answers SERVICE_DISABLED for every endpoint because
the API is not enabled for its OAuth client, and the legacy Contacts API is
retired. Google's CardDAV does work with the same token: PROPFIND Depth:1 on
/carddav/v1/principals/<address>/lists/default/ lists the contacts and each
vCard carries its photo inline as base64, with addressbook-multiget available to
batch the fetches. It would mean indexing the whole address book, because
addressbook-query is rejected, so it is left unbuilt rather than unavailable.

Avatar downloads need no IMAP connection and never block the mail workers.

Message cards update in place, retain loading/error states, and create HTML views
only as expanded cards enter the viewport. Scripts supplied by mail HTML and
external resource loading are blocked; links open externally.
